when something's being taped.
I guess my first question, I love the book, by the way, and I was remarking to my wife last night how very well it's written.
Oh, thank you.
As a book critic, it's not just content I'm interested in, it's the felicity of the writing.
Well, I confess that I find myself often reading books that way.
One of the
And because of that, it's because I enjoy the language, and indeed, frankly, the sound of the language, I tend to read very slowly and almost read aloud to myself.
It cuts down what you tend to read.
How long have you been working on this?
Was this done with an idea to coincide with the Constitution, the Bicentennial?
No.
You know, in one sense, a book like this, I've been working out all my life.
You know, I saw the thoughts of the product going on.
I came from a legal family.
More immediately, consciously, this book, about
As the acknowledgment explained, just before turning to the book, I had been working with Adrian Lowe.
Do you know his work?
No, sir.
Adrian Lowe's an independent television producer, at least he was.
He's now at the Smithsonian in Washington.
He did The Ascent of Man.
Oh, sure.
He did Carl Sagan's Cousins.
And Adrian and I and Houghton Mifflin were projecting a thirteen-part series on the Supreme Court of the United States.
And there would have been a very different book gone with the TV series.
had to raise more money than he could raise from the foundation.
And when that fell through, I had had it in the back of my mind that I would write a book about the Constitution and the courts sometime.
If it hadn't been for that work with Adrian, I probably would have written a book for a much narrower audience.
The other thing that fitted in here was that when I became a university professor at Harvard, I began teaching an undergraduate course as well as teaching at the law school.
And college students are not very different from the kind of person you would hope might be interested in reading this book.
preparing those lectures, in a way, headed into the book.
It was—it all came together more by chance than by design in the year of the Bicentennial.
I wonder, sir—certainly, I'm sure, I'm sure that most, just about every person who is interviewing new
is truly interested in your Watergate experiences, and I wonder if you could reflect for a moment on whether or not you had any idea when you were appointed as Special Prosecutor that you yourself would have a fundamental role in constitutional history, as certainly you did.
I don't think that I ever would have thought of in those terms, no.
I think of the terms I probably would have sought in, whether my role might be similar to that of Owen J. Roberts in the Teapot Doan investigation.
A very important investigation, depending a little on the outcome.
But not something that would seem, as I think it did become, of major constitutional security.
The other thought I had at the outset, and I remember so vividly my conversation with my wife about whether to accept the assignment
I said to her, this is a no-win job.
Meaning, I thought there was a high degree of probability that it would be inconclusive.
That the result would be that the admirers of Richard Nixon would say that if Cox
weren't a Democrat and a Kennedy person.
He'd exculpated the Nixon administration.
The opponents of Richard Nixon would have said, if Cox weren't so dumb, I would have simply suffered the fate that a great many investigations of wrongdoing come to that you couldn't get the evidence that proved
That's recollection, not reconstruction.
I really did think that was the probability.
But looking back, was it a no-win situation in terms of the aftermath?
Oh no, no, no, oh no.
It certainly was a triumphant.
Oh no, it was altogether wrong.
It was altogether wrong.
Oh yes, that was what I thought.
That was the perception prior.
It turned into a very wrong perception, there's no doubt about it.
There certainly were a few days which you described most dramatically here, starting with that evening where you talked with Elliot Richardson.
He was having his first dinner at the White House.
And then culminating, of course, with the Saturday evening massacre, as it has come to be called.
You certainly must have known at that point that you were deep in a historic confrontation.
Yes, I guess...
I guess the answer really is yes, although I was so concerned with the immediate and with its importance in that sense.
Well, presidential noncompliance would have really been a constitutional crisis.
Oh, absolutely.
The only thing that led me not to answer yes, of course, is that I don't think at that time that I...
ever would have applied the adjective historic.
It doesn't make it inaccurate, but I'd have thought it of enormous importance, critical things of that kind.
I wasn't thinking about what history will say.
That's what I meant.
Except for the fact that you were wondering, what are we going to do if the president says no?
Yes, and I was worrying about the consequences for our constitutionalism and the law.
No, all the thoughts were thoughts that lead one to apply the adjective historic.
I just don't think I ever thought, well this will go into the history books.
At that point.
Yeah, one was much more concerned with how it would come out, with what was at stake.
One of your primary theses here is that our system is rooted in voluntary compliance.
I wonder if you could just discuss that for a minute, how it has managed to thrive for 200 years, for two centuries, through voluntary compliance.
I don't know if that's such a question as it is seeking a comment.
I think very deep in the American people has always been a sense of the importance of love, particularly as a Czech government and government officials.
came down to the Founding Fathers from Britain, from the Gurdens, and the fight against the Stuart King, and even back to Magna Carter.
And one thinks of other bits of recognition of it.
You remember, I'm not sure where it's recounted, but it's a familiar story of the French airbags.
He came into New York Harbor and was expecting him to comment on even then the skyline, although it was a much lower skyline than today, and asked his feelings when he came.
Instead of referring to skyline or liberty, he said, ah, to scent the sweet smell of legalité.
That's nice.
We ought to talk about the lawlessness of Americans.
And in a certain sense, the frontier did bring a kind of lawlessness to challenges to authority.
But I don't think that was anywhere near as deep-seated as the importance of government under law.
I think this is deep in the American people, even though they don't consciously think in terms of those sayings of liars, historians.
There have always been challenges, issues, and stuff.
And one hopes there always will be, certainly.
Well, there always will be.
The law in a formal sense can be quite wrong in the sense of an aspiration and ideal.
I think it does still command our allegiance.
Watergate was a challenge of the highest levels of government.
Iran was a challenge of the highest levels of government.
By the way, would you like a picture without the coffee cup?
Would that make any difference?
I don't have it at all.
OK.
I'll put it down in just a second.
I did want to get to Iran-Contra and ask you to compare the two as constitutional crises.
Which do you think threatened the Constitution more, or were they equally as threatening to our... Well... I think they had this in common.
that both did involve indifference to the rule of law, disregard of the rule of law at or near to the very highest levels of government.
I think the fundamental thing about both
The fundamental wrong was very perceptively expressed by Jim Magruder.
You remember, he was a minor Wattegate figure after Wattegate.
When he said, and this is just about a direct quotation, I can't guarantee everybody was just about it, Jack.
We in the White House felt that the ordinary rules didn't apply to us.
We were engaged in a mission.
It was the mission that counted, not the rules, meaning the law.
What better description could you have of the attitude of the principles involved in our encounter?
It is rather frustrating, isn't it, that in a scant 10 or 12 years, or 14 years, the same sins are repeated.
It's very disturbing, and I think one of the things that the select committees ought to be asking, as should all of us, is there some explanation in the way
the White House staff is organized and administered.
I'm not sure of the answer, but I suggest that the topsy-turvy growth of White House staff over the last certainly twenty-five years goes a long way to
to explain what happened, constituted sort of fertile soil for the right personalities to act, these characteristics.
One, of course, enormous power.
Two, with some rare exceptions,
The White House staffs over the past twenty-five years have been men who were a sense of public life, nobodies except for the president's favor.
That's interesting.
And if they lost the president's favor, they would go back to being nobodies again, in the public sense.
Now, I think the combination of those two very quickly breeds an attitude that, well, what I must do is please the boss.
Nothing else counts except pleasing the boss.
Congress, everyone else, becomes outsiders, becomes sort of enemies.
You use your power to manipulate them.
But it must be frustrating to think that with what we went through in Watergate and culminated with the resignation of a president that some lessons might have been learned, and apparently they weren't.
Well, you're right.
It is.
And unfortunately, to come back to your similarities and differences,
Well, unfortunately, the, well, I think what I've said is really the key thing in the Iran chapter, as it was a measure.
It's a much more complex picture.
It's much harder to cut through all the details, all the good intentions
in the sense of the mission in Iran Patra.
The mission, at least immediately, and Watergate affair wasn't very worthy.
It was to get re-elected.
It was politically selfish.
Now, they may have hoped to do good things when they got the political power, but it, whereas a man who was flying
to the importance to our whole system of government and national life, of the role that high officials are subject to the law, could honestly believe he was doing good in seeking to get the hostages free and to aid the conquerors in Nicaragua.
I think that view is misguided, but a man could honestly hold it.
Well, I remember Colonel North's quote that I thought it was a neat idea.
Remember he said he thought... Yes.
And then I wondered, the situation just cried for a response.
Do you think constitutional government is a neat idea as well?
Right, right.
I was just wishing somebody would have said something like that to him.
Well, the White House staff, my understanding from the outside, is...
Remarkably free freedom.
In this particular administration, or as a— I think in lots of ways, in lots of administrations.
Perhaps quite— The power to pick up the phone and to say, this is so-and-so in the White House encourages, pretty clearly.
And arrogance.
Yes.
Do you see erosion?
in the Constitution?
I mean, does this indicate, is this disquieting?
Do you see any erosion in the power of the Constitution?
I believe not in the law, Paul.
I'm not by nature an optimist.
Not an optimist in the sense that I am
I think we're going to reach the New Jerusalem ever, but in the sense that I think there were a lot of stumbling and often steps backward to graduate and make some human progress.
And I don't think that what I call the great American adventure has ended, I think.
Basic characteristics.
carried us where we are from where we were 200 years ago, and still survive, but I'm mindful there's always have been flow, and the process always has been.
I'm going to just turn this tape on the other side.